welcome back everyone Laszlo Montgomery
here once again with another CHP episode
the 208 and a series going all the way
back to mid 2010 sorry for the recent
disappearing act but I believe I warned
you last episode it's hectic here to say
the least and there hasn't been the
usual amount of CHP time as in years
past to churn out these episodes sorry I
can't give you any details
interesting though they are you may end
up getting much more than you bargained
for in this episode at no additional
charge whatsoever I thought while we
were all here discussing this subject to
the Jewish refugees in China why not fly
our balloon at Felix Baumgartner Heights
one more time and get a free overview of
some of the history of the Jews and why
it was much later on that many Jews were
fleeing in such great numbers from their
cities towns and villages during the
first half of the 20th century and
heading in the direction of China
you know when Jews and Chinese get
together sometimes there's this banter
about how the two peoples have so many
shared values the main ones I hear are
the parallels between Confucian and
judeo-christian values love of Education
and learning closeness of family
thriftiness entrepreneurial skills this
tendency to stick together good in
business a worldwide diaspora who
achieved so much in their adoptive homes
a history of persecution and a lot of
places where this diaspora ended up a
shared suffering during World War Two
and a few others that attests to the
notion that indeed Jews Chinese yeah
there sure is a lot you could say they
have in common
I found that although you can rattle off
these similarities that didn't
necessarily mean they're exclusive to
Jews and Chinese you could say the same
thing about a lot of other cultures as
well but for these two I feel totally
fine making that gross generalization
that yeah there are a lot of things Jews
and Chinese have in common
each other and it was perhaps this very
notion that contributed to these two
peoples pretty much getting along
historically speaking and maintaining a
relationship that didn't rack up a great
deal of historical traumas or incidents
to point to throughout the centuries and
Jews have been slepping around China
going back to the most ancient times in
Chinese history certainly at least to
the Western Han after Emperor Wu stoked
the fires of the Silk Roads in the first
century BCE and China announced to the
world they were open for business in
Chinese Confucian 'us Dow s and
Buddhists day to that no beef with the
Jews so popular anti-semitism in China
never took root the earliest evidence
that shows indeed Jews were no strangers
to China would be in the Tong dynasty
but there's a lot of thick smoke
attesting to a much earlier presence and
for everyone who remembers the Chi Fung
Jews episode CHP 112 from way back in
2014 the Persian geographer and writer
it been Horta Bay 822 912 he wrote a
book that mentioned these rotten Knights
and he identified them as being Jewish
traders who during the Frankish Empire
5th to 9th centuries were gifted in all
the languages of the Silk Road and
carried out trade by land and sea and
this supply chain stretched from the
eastern Mediterranean all the way to
Shaanxi province in China in the Persian
language or at least back then
raaah meant path or way and Don means
one who knows so these Rada Knights knew
the path or knew the way and Hebrew they
were called the rod Ani and I read that
early rabbinic Talmudic and Roman
sources attest to the Jews as being in
the silk trade back then rabbinic era
we've maybe heard this term before first
and second centuries BCE basically the
Western Han starting all the way back
with lil bung and the founding of the
dynasty
these Rada Knights played a unique role
in the linking of the markets between
East and West during an important time
in the development of humankind
they passed a lot more than physical
commodities back and forth knowledge
ideas and beliefs were transferred as
well well if not for it been córdoba's
surviving manuscripts we might not have
known of these Jewish Rada Knights but
there's other evidence scant as it is
that attests to the fact that this
relationship between the Jewish people
and the Chinese went way back the Hebrew
year in this Chinese ear of the dog 2018
is 57 79 which means using my electronic
tabulating machine Jews can claim
they've been around since 3761 BCE all
detailed in the book of Genesis the
first Jew Abraham he's pegged at more or
less 2000 BCE the time of the mythical
shot dynasty in China 1011 BCE King
Solomon built the first temple King
Solomon who Z king of he was king of
Israel son of David
Melik Israel King David Kings David and
Solomon that period was contemporaneous
with the early parts of the Western Joe
in China Kings when wool and one of the
pillars of Chinese culture the Duke of
CHO if no one objects to violently I'm
gonna channel Bob Beamon and take a
running long jump over the history of
the Kingdom of Israel including the
Assyrian captivity 8th century BCE and
the more popularly known Babylonian
captivity of the 6th and 7th centuries
BCE to get to the parts that are a bit
more relevant to today's episode and
that is the time of the Roman Empire
Solomon's Temple which stood for more
than 400 years was destroyed in 586 587
BCE that was nebuchadnezzar ii then
seven decades later the temple was
rebuilt and it's this second temple that
was destroyed in 70 CE II by the forces
led by Titus the future Roman Emperor
this was the early part of the Eastern
Han Dynasty the arch of Titus in Rome it
commemorates this event the Western Wall
in Jerusalem is part of this second
temple destroyed in 70 CE II that's all
that remains these are all early
stepping stones that led in the
direction of the events of the 20th
century that we'll get to now where am I
going with this after this period where
the Jews and Romans fought these wars
and Judea was conquered the Jews
dispersed in this diaspora yeah because
of the way the Roman Empire ended up and
the much later rise of Islam and the
development of Europe and Roman
Catholicism during the Middle Ages the
Jews spread out into two main geographic
regions that developed as a result of
this disastrous defeat in 70 CE II and
all the persecution and destruction that
followed some didn't venture as far as
others and remained in the geographic
area we know today as the Middle East
many also escaped westward to North
Africa and across the Strait into
southern Spain now these were all the
Sephardic Jews now since world war ii
it's more common to call the Middle
Eastern Jews Mizrahi Jews to
differentiate them from those who went
to Spain prior to world war ii and the
creation of the State of Israel the
Mizrahi Jews all sort of got lumped
together with the Spanish and North
African Sephardic Jews all those who
left their ancestral home and headed in
a northerly direction towards central
and northern Europe European Russia
those are the Ashkenazi Jews ashkenaz
was the great-grandson of Noah these
Jews fled to the north of Europe
following the Rhine River into Germany
and France and then they spread out from
there for our story especially when we
get to the Shanghai part of it this is
pretty important this safar deme or
Sephardic Jewish community in China they
had a much different China story than
their Ashkenazi cousins these two Jewish
communities of Safari
and Ashkenazim they didn't speak the
same language they pronounced Hebrew
slightly differently they had their own
ways of running a prayer service fixing
a home how they made their daily bread
and I certainly dress differently same
but not the same we'll get back to this
later the Kai Fung Jews a little later
on were one such group of safar deme
that had to get up and go
they settled in Chi Fung and then in
1163 after years of being model citizens
the Emperor granted these Jews the right
to build their own temple to establish a
community and during the Song Dynasty
they thrived and over time if you recall
from that past episode these kaifeng
Jews completely assimilated and over the
centuries simply melted into the Chinese
pot the tale of the Chi Fung Jews as far
as popular Chinese history goes hangs
its hat on the four stelae that contain
inscriptions that reveal the state of
the Jewish religion in that community
three of the four Stella's made it down
to the present day they were de tat 1485
1512 and 1663 ming and early Ching if
you want to know more about this once
flourishing Jewish community along the
Yellow River in China go check out CHP
episode 112 if you'd like a little more
authoritative scholarly look at the
stelae I invite you to look up the Chi
Fung stone inscriptions by Tiberio Weiss
I'll put a link to that book on the
webpage he's quite an expert on this
subject the 1489 Stella in particular
mentioned some of these same
similarities rattled off in our day
about Judaism and Chinese Confucianism
let me quote from this Ming Dynasty
stelae quote our religion and
Confucianism differ only in minor
details in mind indeed both respect
heavens way venerate ancestors are loyal
to sovereigns and ministers and filial
to parents both call for harmony with
wives and children respect for rank and
for making friends end quote
between the fall of the song and the
period where this little overview begins
there's about six centuries song you're
in Ming Ching I repeat in Chinese
history there is a veritable dearth of
bad blood between the Jewish people who
came to China and the Chinese people who
rubbed up against them since the Silk
Road days two kindred spirits perhaps
and I'm guessing perhaps both Chinese
and Jews saw something in the other that
was familiar now let's get to the story
remember I said there were Sephardic
Jews and Ashkenazi Jews the Sephardic
Jews came to China in great numbers
first as I said many of these safar deme
came from the Middle East mostly Iraq
which was then still part of the Ottoman
Empire now why did they come well the
same reason everybody else did the opium
wars yielded the treaties of Nanjing
1842 10 June 1858 and the convention of
peking 1860 the grand dream thought up
by the earliest European traders who
came to China unfettered access to the
China heartland they were one step
closer a bunch of ports up and down the
China coast opened for trade merchants
from all over the world beat a path to
all these treaty ports and like I said
Jewish traders among them when you walk
around Shanghai today along the Bund
Nanjing Road a lot of those buildings
you see around you were built or
financed by these Sephardic Jews these
early arrivals who were already waiting
in the queue when the ports were opened
they had a head start on everyone else
most of them had already
well-established trading operations in
India dealing at cotton and opium they
built Sassoon house the Metropole Hotel
Grove in her house the embankment
building Hamilton house and of course
cafe mansions all Shanghai landmarks
from this early era at one time fully
one-third of the members of the Shanghai
Stock Exchange were these safar deme
and the three most famous their names
are found in every single history of the
Jews in China these three families were
the Sassoon's the Kaduri z' and the hard
dunes they were not the first Jews to
show up at these treaty ports but they
were the first ones to make a name for
themselves and leave a few monuments to
their legacy behind so you'll be hearing
their names throughout this series these
Iraqi Jews who came to Shanghai in the
late 1840s by way of India they quickly
figured out the lay of the land in
Shanghai these Iraqi Jewish merchants
were culturally quite different from the
Western establishment but their business
acumen their money financing power
combined economic influence and
philanthropy allowed them to mingle in
Shanghai high society and to be one of
the beautiful people of this fire Dame
and the Ashkenazim the former came to
China in the 1840s looking to create
wealth and build business empires the
latter came in the early 20th century
running for their lives
Elias David Sassoon was the first to
arrive in 1844 he was in his early
twenties he came from the Sassoon office
in Bombay Mumbai he built the foundation
of the Sassoon fortune in China and
helped get the place established other
sessions followed in time they became
known as the Rothschilds of the East I
have them reserved for their own CHP
episode one day so I don't want to start
wandering down that path now they were
as I said with the khador ease and
hardens the most preeminent Jewish
family in China more on the CAD or ease
and others is her story progresses the
first Sephardic synagogue was built in
1887 beth-el it's not there anymore a
replacement for beth-el was opened in
1920 and this was oh hell Rachel this
shanghai-based Iraqi or Baghdady
community as they came to be known did
well for themselves and they cultivated
this earliest Jewish community in China
to take hold in modern times
and as we'll see it'll fall on these
Baghdady Jews later on to come to the
rescue
of the refugees who will flee by the
thousands from Russia Germany and from
all over Central and Eastern Europe at
its peak I don't think the Baghdady
Jewish community in China numbered more
than a thousand or 1500 tops I also read
it never top 700 and not all of them are
rich either and most worked for the
Sassoon's or the hard Doom's and
kaduri's or for any other number of
trading houses or as security guards
rent collectors for the vast property
holdings of these tycoons these Iraqi
Jews spoke a kind of Judeo Arabic
language and of course English the
language business Judeo Arabic on a
simple level was essentially Arabic with
plenty of Hebrew and bits of Aramaic
mixed in and varies from region to
region in southern Spain they spoke a
language known as Ladino el ad ino
sometimes referred to as judeo-spanish
later on when the Ashkenazi Jew start
arriving you'll see there's a bit of a
language barrier they spoke Yiddish
German Russian polish Czech and
Hungarian these Fardeen were the
high-class Jews and being high-class and
all they didn't mingle too terribly much
with the average Russian and European
Jews who came after them
this Baghdady community was well known
for their philanthropy and spreading
their wealth around and not just to
their fellow Jews to the local Chinese
community as well I suppose if he had to
pinpoint a certain time in history where
European Jews first started considering
other options that would have been in
Russia during the time of Catherine the
Great she had a similar affection for
the Jews that the next day anti-semite
had only more so when she was growing up
there were already Jews living in Russia
but after the partitions of Poland 1770
to 1793 and 1794
five when Russia acquired these vast
lands at Poland's expense Catherine the
Great was horrified to learn a lot of
Jews came with the deal and whereas
before there weren't that many after the
second partition when Poland and
Lithuania were taken over these lands
contained over five million Jews and
Catherine the Great who wasn't a big fan
of the Jewish people I guess you could
say she counted among her subjects forty
percent of the global Jewish population
there was one place set up within the
Russian Empire where Jews could live not
necessarily in peace but they were
restricted to this one area and this was
called The Pale of Settlement a pale PA
le is an archaic English term it means a
stake or an area enclosed by a fence or
legal boundary Jews were allowed to live
inside this pail with a bunch of
restrictions and they weren't allowed to
go beyond the pale you heard that term
before if something went way outside the
bounds of accepted behavior it went
beyond the pale this term went back to
the Middle Ages in Ireland there was an
area under English control at district
within an imposed boundary anyway
if you went beyond the pale you went
outside the restricted area and were you
know considered uncivilized The Pale of
Settlement this is where the Jews had to
live today this vast area covers parts
of Belarus Lithuania Moldova Poland and
Ukraine Russia slowly took this area
over starting in the mid 17th century
everything in the late 18th century that
was wrong with the Russian Empire these
Jews living in the pale of settlements
were always the go-to scapegoats for any
occasion as bad as it was for these
Eastern European Jews it was gonna get a
whole lot worse as the countdown to
World War one and the October Revolution
began Jews tended to organize themselves
in these little villages spread out all
over the pale these villages or
Elsworth where the jews laid low lived
their lives and always had an eye open
for signs of trouble in Yiddish shtetl
means a little town many my older
listeners might remember the play and
later the movie fiddler on the roof
old Tevye the milkman he and his family
lived in one such shtetl remember what
happened to Tevye he got chased off his
land this was that time to add to the
misery of the pogroms of the early 1880s
the may laws of 1882 were instituted
that essentially banned Jews from
inhabiting certain rural areas and
limited the kinds of professions they
can get into anyway the pale was ended
March 20th 1917 by government decree the
pale may have ended but the
anti-semitism and the occasional pogroms
remained pogroms were anti-semitic
campaigns sanctioned by the Tsar's
government and enforced by the cossacks
the Tsar's elite corps of horsemen and
military officers and wasn't a good time
for Jews under Catherine the Great but
by the time a Nicholas the first 1821
1855 no Jewish boy of Bar Mitzvah age
was safe from the threat of military
conscription in Jewish history Tsar
Nicholas the first is sometimes referred
to as Haman the second Jews who went
through the sunday and Hebrew school
regimen all recall the story of the
Vizier under King Ahaz a ruse Haman with
the hamantaschen and the Gregor he
conspired to have all the Jews of Persia
killed all recorded in the book of
Esther in the Old Testament these
restrictive laws continued under
Nicholas's son Alexander the second and
then reached new heights under one of
the truly great anti-semites in history
Alexander the third no room for Jews in
this Alexander's Russia not even in the
Pale of Settlement and by the time he
came to his premature end in 1894 Jews
living in the Russian Empire more and
more began thinking about China as
estimation a lot of juice today all over
the world and certainly here in the USA
ended up where they did because of
grandparents and great-grandparents who
got chased out of Russia and Ukraine
during this time in fact between 1881
and 1914 a total of about two million of
these Jews spread out across the shtetl
zuv The Pale of Settlement hit the road
and spread themselves out all over the
world at the commencement of world war
ii there were about eight to nine
million jews in europe we know from that
past episode on russia china relations
CHP 181 that russian never stopped
expanding east towards the Pacific Ocean
until they actually reached it they did
this by peeling away outer manchuria
from China at a time when the Middle
Kingdom was weak and down on its luck
and it's here in easternmost Russia that
the story of the Jewish refugees in
China starts to perk up a bit up till
then the Jewish presence in China was
mostly limited to the Sephardic Baghdady
Jews who had set themselves up in mostly
Shanghai now came the Russian Jews a
different sort than these oriental Jews
as they are sometimes referred to how
did these Russian Jews end up in China
it all began with the China Eastern
Railway the dong Cheng Kia loop they had
linked the Chinese city of man chole
just over the Russian border from Cheeta
with the port city of Vladivostok the
end of the line of the trans-siberian
railway
after the sino-japanese war ended in
1895 China looked first to Russia as a
you know potential ally in checking
Japanese expansion plans in Manchuria
letting rush I have a free hand in
building and managing this railway it
seemed like a good idea at the time the
Qing government figured they had ought
to keep the Japanese at bay Russia under
the terms of a secret agreement in 1896
received a concession in China to build
this railway that would
take the trans-siberian all the way to
fly to Vostok and by 1902 1903 it was
ready for passengers and perhaps the
greatest upshot of this railroad project
was the creation of the city of Harbin
and heilongjiang province one of the
three provinces that today makes up
Manchuria her bean which used to be a
minor fishing village became the
administrative center of the whole China
Eastern Railway it became a magnet for
thousands and thousands of Russians who
came to work on the railroad and became
part of this new world that was being
created by this railway the Russian Tsar
offered all kinds of incentives for
people to go east and create a new life
there and become part of Russia's new
Pacific Empire that now stretched from
st. Petersburg all the way to flatter
Vostok a lot of Russians came including
Jews that they came a few families at
first inevitably followed by others by
the time of the completion of the China
Eastern Railway in 1903 there were 500
Jews already in Harbin and as they did
wherever they went these Jewish settlers
began building businesses and creating
companies that provided essential
services to the other inhabitants of the
area if you look on a map eastern most
Russia is about as far as you could
possibly get from the
government-sponsored pogroms happening
in European Russia this far to the east
Russian Jews knew they'd be less likely
to feel the pain inflicted by Cossacks
and a populace that trended anti-semitic
in 1905 1907 more pogroms were launched
that led to even further migration to
this part of Russia so that by 1908
there were about 8,000 Jews among all
the Russians who came to this part of
Manchuria that held so much promise was
such a Russian presence growing like it
was the Japanese military flush with
confidence at the whooping they gave
China and the sino-japanese war they
began to be
weary of all this Russian expansion into
a part of China that they already had
their eye on and this buildup of Russian
influence in Manchuria especially in and
around heart bean was growing at a very
fast clip this part of Manchuria
including Dalian and Port Arthur it was
going nowhere but up but not for Russia
1904 Japan attacked a Russian Eastern
fleet and Port Arthur today known as Liu
Xuan Kok and we all know what happened
the new kid in town the Empire of Japan
just put away the Chinese Empire in 1895
and now this great Western power the
Empire of Russia defeated suddenly in
this northeast part of China the whole
dynamic changed with Japan appearing so
invincible and so quickly the
russo-japanese war this is where the
Jews came pouring into her being that
was Russia's command center for this war
these Jews didn't come as refugees they
were serving in the army this was not
some small-scale limited conflict over
one and a quarter million troops on each
side fought a hundred and seventy-five
thousand Russian soldiers were killed
wounded or taken prisoner by the
Japanese losses on the Japanese side
were even higher filling the ranks of
the Russian army involved a lot of
conscription and in this age-old process
going back to time immemorial it was
always the least privileged who received
the highest priority and Jews who met
the basic criteria to be sacrificed on
the front lines were among these
unfortunates they came by the tens of
thousands to go fight in the
russo-japanese war and when it was all
over and the ink was dry and the Treaty
of Portsmouth and Theodore Roosevelt had
his Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts
and mediating between Russia and Japan
many of these Jewish soldiers who fought
in the war stayed put and to the city of
Hart being they went the Russian
military wasn't funding the repatriation
or demobilization of troops so that was
another reason a lot of Rosh
Shen's including jews headed to her beam
instead it's for the Ashkenazi Jewish
experience in China
it began in her being it might have
begun with si Bert Sol the first Jew to
arrive in her beam in 1899 the first
recorded minion was held at the home of
one il bak the following ere the first
rabbi was Schnurr Zalman gosh Co that
was in 1902 the year construction began
on the first show by then Jewish
businesses were popping up like
mushrooms everywhere and the budding
Jewish community that had been spawned
by the construction of the China Eastern
and South Manchurian railways and then
the russo-japanese war continued to
expand and before long her bein was a
thriving community complete with its own
little Moscow at its peak one out of
every three Russians walking the streets
of Harbin were Jewish these Jews weren't
high and mighty like the Sassoon's
orchid or ease they were everyday Jews a
lot weren't terribly religious but they
had skedaddled from some part of Russia
or the pail and came to this strange new
land got settled relied on the safety
net of their own kind who came before
them formed a community built a temple
that also served as the center of the
community and they hustled every day of
the week except on Shabbos if they were
so inclined and they built businesses of
all kinds well that story
rhymes well with the experience of the
Chinese immigrants who came to America
in Harbin on Tong Zhong Street and the
Dali District you can still see the main
synagogue that was completed in January
1909 a new synagogue was also built
later called the new synagogue to
differentiate it from the old synagogue
in 1913 a census of her being counted
34,313
first place twenty three thousand five
hundred and thirty seven Chinese 5032
Jews two thousand five hundred and fifty
polls and only 696 Japanese but that
will change then with the onset of World
War one and then the October Revolution
1917 that brought a third wave of Jews
to Hara beam and this really beefed up
the numbers by the 1930s and the eve of
JoePa the Mukden incident there were
something like 30,000 Jews who called
Harbin home around the time of World War
one the community mobilized to create
the Harbin Far East Jewish Relief
Committee who came to the aid of those
fleeing the pogroms and also to support
former Russian Jewish soldiers the
history of her being during this early
time was filled with every kind of
Jewish culture and Yiddish guide you
could imagine food entertainment theater
art journalism libraries and all kinds
of social clubs there were something
like 20 or 30 newspapers magazines and
journals during this period fortunately
a lot of individual stories have been
transmitted down to our time from this
period if you google Harbin Jews or
search on youtube you'll see there's no
shortage of personal stories to go
groove on there's a lot of material that
made it to our time and as in Shanghai
over the years community leaders would
emerge in Harbin names like Bonner Kroll
Mandela vich cabal Caen Skidelsky and
Sampson ovitch but the name that is
perhaps most prominent in the history of
the Harby and Jewish community is
Abraham Kaufman
he lived 1885 to 1971 he came from
Chernigov and Russia now part of Ukraine
he was the grandson of one of the most
revered names in the Jewish Habad
movement Rebbe Zalman Schneerson Abraham
Kaufman came to Harbin in 1912 and in
time became the head of the Jewish
community there until the end of World
War two after the war he ended up
getting arrested by the Soviets and got
put in a gulag for 11 years but happy
ending he ended up in Israel in 1961
where he
lived out his last ten years but in the
city of Harbin he was the leader who the
Jews deferred to Abraham Kaufmann was
also the leader in the Harbin Zionist
movement I don't want to get into the
subject of Zionism when men's Yom
hot-smoked is another man's Yom and
knock-back however just for the purposes
of this episode many of the Jews who
ended up in Harbin during the first half
of the 20th century many were supporters
of the Zionist movement that essentially
called for the re-establishment of a
Jewish homeland in what was called
historic Israel and anyone familiar with
that history knows that land was at that
time while all this was happening in
Manchuria was called Palestine and
mostly populated by Arabs Zionist groups
in Harbin were working overtime to try
and resettle Jewish refugees from all
over the world in Palestine there was a
very vigorous and effective Zionist
movement in Harbin and elsewhere in
China of course you know not many people
know this but Sun yat-sen was an
enthusiastic supporter of not only
scientism but of the Jews in general I
guess you could surmise son died in 1925
but prior to this time when he was
desperately trying to make the best of a
bad situation maybe you could say he
spoke often about the Jewish people and
their Zionist cause he equated it with
Chinese nationalism and their struggle
in the face of injustice is meted out
against China by the international
community not only Sun yat-sen but many
others in the Republic of China
government lent their support especially
after the bell for declaration November
2nd 1917 in April of 1920 Sun yat-sen
had written to the founder of the
Shanghai Zionist Association nism Elias
Benjamin Ezra known also as anyb Azra
quote all lovers of democracy cannot
help but support wholeheartedly and
welcome with enthusiasm the movement to
restore your wonderful and historic
nation
which rightfully deserves an honorific
place in the family of Nations end quote
le Kaduri who will talk more about next
episode he was later a chairman of the
Shanghai Zionist Association there were
several in China and I don't want to
dwell on this history but suffice to say
playing out in the background while our
story unfolds in China was this whole
movement so thanks to the opportunities
presented by the railroads the
russo-japanese war the Russian
Revolution World War one and of course
the well-worn but always effective forms
of intimidation the Jews faced during
the frequent pogroms a safe haven
emerged in this city and the Songhua
River where the Russian Jews could
breathe easy and enjoy a normal life
over time Harbin began to be referred to
as the oriental st. Petersburg and even
got to join such great cities as Hanoi
Saigon and Shanghai as another Paris of
the Orient and later on because of the
Russian culture that just oozed out of
hardened it was also called the city of
music as the history of Harbin was
emerging Borodin and Tchaikovsky had
just been gone only a few decades
Mussorgsky had recently passed
rimsky-korsakov passed away in 1908
everything great about Russian music
that had just been gifted to the world
you could hear it in her being - in the
three cities I will focus on in this
series Harbin Tianjin and Shanghai each
had their own Grand Hotel where everyone
went for a special night out and if you
were someone well-heeled and passing
through Harbin you always had a sticker
on your suitcase from the modern hotel
Moderne with an e on the end today the
hotel can be found on Chong yang da Jie
no more e on the end of its present
incarnation but it's still there it was
built by a wealthy Jewish businessman
named Joseph Kasper he made his fortune
in the jewelry business and from a chain
of theaters but in its time the modern
was the place like the Astor House was
in Shanghai for a while it had its grand
opening in September 1914 anyone who was
anyone in the world of entertainment if
they came to hire beam that's where they
performed it was hard being Palace for
the privileged classes of Russians and
Chinese in every affair and the Harbin
Jewish community that called for
wall-to-wall chopped liver it was held
at the modern this Harbin Jewish
community these Harbin see reached his
peak in 1930 soon after that this
perfect little world the Jews had
created for themselves in Harbin took a
huge hit when the Japanese made their
move on 9 1831 and more outwardly
carried out their takeover of Manchuria
the Jews who called her being their home
began to have other ideas after the
Japanese moved in and tried to establish
control over this most key city in
Manchuria this led to one of the most
memorable incidents from that time that
directly led to a mass exodus of Jews
from Harbin this was the kidnap and
murder of Joseph caspase talented 24
year old pianist son Simeon this was the
Getty kidnapping of its day they
kidnapped him demanded ransom from the
father poor Joseph Caspar worked with
the French consulate for 95 days to
handle the negotiations the kidnappers
later cut off Simeon caspase ears and
sent them to Joseph and kept demanding
their chips and when it was all over
Simeon Caspi was murdered after a few
rounds of torture at the hands of his
kidnappers this was the 1933 that was
pretty much it
the Japanese who investigated the case
sort of looked the other way and the
message was clear nothing was going to
come of this ever since they rolled into
town and muscled in on all the action
the Japanese were more interested in
working with the White Russians
her beam to maintain order keep the
Communists at bay and if that meant
looking the other way when white russian
anti-semites did their thing kill the
Jew here and there well that's the way
it had to be the end of World War one
and the Russian Revolution brought a lot
of these white Russians to her beam it's
hard to know who they aided more
Bolsheviks or Jews but whatever the case
they brought the whole gamut of
anti-semitic inclinations to China that
were made famous in Eastern Europe and
Russia and into the 1920s the same old
familiar routine of getting roughed up
on the streets and constantly getting
intimidated and ripped off started to
become commonplace for Jews in the 1931
the Harbin russian fascist party was
founded they too became a tool of the
Japanese who found common ground with
them and used them to put the squeeze on
anyone the Japanese authorities had
their eye on and many her being Jews had
property or assets that the Japanese
wanted so having toughs to do their
dirty work was how the Japanese did it
sometimes and in the next episode we'll
pick up with the decline of the Jewish
presence in Harbin and what happened
after that we'll also look at Tianjin
and of course everything that transpired
down in Shanghai we leave the Harbin
Jews in these oppressive days following
JoePa one of the dates in Chinese
history that lives in infamy the Mukden
incident wasn't good for China and the
Chinese nor for the Jews of her being
please think about coming back next time
for more I'm gonna mention more about
this in the next episode but if you're
at all interested in this subject of the
Jewish refugees in China ya might want
to go take a peek at hello gold Mountain
dot-com and see what that's all about
my favorite goo Jung player in the world
wolf a is teaming up with a talented
group of musicians and will feature an
original composition that will
commemorate this history of the Jewish
refugees in China
especially the Shanghai part I'll tell
you more about this project that I'm
excited for next episode
hello gold Mountain comm a link will be
in the show notes check that out and get
a sneak preview I would be remiss if I
didn't let you know how he's Southworth
and Greg Matz's Chinese Street food book
is out I just got my copy yesterday you
want to know how to make bong bong Xi
Jinping yo tio and my all-time favorite
I'll show a hundred recipes all that
great stuff you could get on the streets
at China's culinary capitals make it in
the comfort of your own home with your
own pots and pans and hygiene standard
Howie Southworth and Greg matzo Chinese
Street food out now I'll have an Amazon
link to this best seller on the website
and show notes oh and did you notice
where'd those ads go that have been
littered throughout these CHP programs
all dog year-long Gone Baby Gone
you know I'll be upfront with you with
all that ad revenue I was expecting from
those commercials well I had my eye on a
property right near Lake Como not far
from George Clooney's place in fact but
I forgot to inform everyone by the time
I got my share of the ad revenue pie so
to speak yeah Lake Como wasn't looking
too good nor my chances of you know
maybe bumping into George Clooney so in
lieu of ads that have no relation
whatsoever to Chinese history I'm
pulling the plug
going ad free and will beg for donations
instead and let me say this if I bring
in enough donations from enough CHP
listeners when I closed on that Lake
Como property you're all invited I'm
serious November 2nd and 3rd at Harvard
you could come see me live at the sound
education conference dan Carlin will be
the keynote speaker hey baby I'm
bringing my autographed book for sure if
you're in the Boston area
come see me I'm speaking Saturday the
3rd at Rockefeller Hall if you can't
make it I'll have the talk available on
8-track and cassette for purchase later
on until the next time
this is Laszlo Montgomery signing off
from Los Angeles I beseech you once
again
please consider coming back next time
and it won't be very long I assure you
for another exciting episode of the
China history podcast
you